Bgrenon branch restore mvp (#1333)
neondatabase/website: content/docs/guides/branch-restore.md

---
title: Branch Restore

> subtitle: Learn how to revert changes or recover lost data using Neon Branch Restore, with Time Travel Assist to query historical data as part of your restore workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subtitle: Learn how to revert changes or recover lost data using Neon Branch Restore with Time Travel Assist
```

enableTableOfContents: true
---

With Neon's branch restore capability, you can easily restore a branch to an earlier state in its history. You can also use Time Travel Assist to run read-only queries against any point in your history retention window to pinpoint the exact moment you need to restore to.

> ## How it works

Reviewer 2: "Overview"

Author: Changed to "How branch restore works".

> ## How it works

Author: ```suggestion
## How branch restore works
```

> With Neon's copy-on-write branch creation capability, just as you can instantly create branches from any point in your history retention window, you can just as easily restore a branch to an earlier state in that history. You can also use Time Travel Assist to help troubleshoot issues: run read-only queries against any point in your history retention window as a way to pinpoint the exact moment you need to restore to, before you proceed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Neon's branch restore capability, you can easily restore a branch to an earlier state in its history. You can also use Time Travel Assist to run read-only queries against any point in your history retention window to pinpoint the exact moment you need to restore to.
```

### Restore from history

> The restore operation lets you revert the state of a selected branch to an earlier point in time. For example, revert to just before some corruption or loss of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The restore operation lets you revert the state of a selected branch to an earlier point in time. For example, you can revert to a state just before a data loss occurred.
```

![branch restore to timestamp](/docs/guides/branch_restore_time.png)

By default, the history retention for a Neon project is 7 days. You can revert a branch to any time within that configured [retention window](/docs/manage/projects#configure-history-retention), down to the millisecond.

A few key points to keep in mind about the restore operation:
- [Current data is overwritten](#overwrite-not-a-merge)
- [Restore backups are created automatically in case you make a mistake](#automatic-backups)
- [All databases on a branch are restored](#changes-apply-to-all-databases)

> - [Connections are temporarily interrupted](#connections-temporarily-interrupted)

Author: Good points. Fixed.

> - [Restore backups are created automatically](#automatic-backups)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Restore backups are created automatically in case you make a mistake](#automatic-backups)
```

> - [All databases on a branch are updated](#changes-apply-to-all-databases)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [All databases on a branch are restored](#changes-apply-to-all-databases)
```

#### Overwrite, not a merge

> It is important to understand that whenever you restore a branch, you are performing a _complete_ overwrite, not a merge or refresh. Everything on your current branch, data and schema, is replaced with the contents from the historical source. All interim data from the selected restore point onwards is removed from the branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is important to understand that whenever you restore a branch, you are performing a _complete_ overwrite, not a merge or refresh. Everything on your current branch, data and schema, is replaced with the contents from the historical source. All data changes from the selected restore point onwards are excluded from the branch.
```

#### Automatic backups

> In case you need to rollback the update, Neon preserves the branch's final state before the restore operation in an automatically created backup branch, which takes the following format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you need to rollback a restore, Neon preserves the branch's final state before the restore operation in an automatically created backup branch, which takes the following format:
```

```md
{branch_name}_old_{head_timestamp}
```

You can use this backup to rollback the restore operation if necessary.

> 

Reviewer: The backup branches are listed on the **Branches** page in the Neon Console among your other branches.

#### Changes apply to all databases

> A reminder that in Neon's [object hierarchy](/docs/manage/overview), a branch can include any number of databases. Keep this in mind when restoring branches. For example, let's say you want to fix some corrupted content in a given database. If you restore your branch to an earlier point in time before the corruption occurred, the operation applies to _all_ databases on the branch, not just the one you are troubleshooting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A reminder that in Neon's [object hierarchy](/docs/manage/overview), a branch can include any number of databases. Keep this in mind when restoring branches. For example, let's say you want to restore lost data in a given database. If you restore your branch to an earlier point in time before the data loss occurred, the operation applies to _all_ databases on the branch, not just the one you are troubleshooting.
```

> In general, Neon recommends that you avoid overstuffing a project with too many databases. If you have multiple, distinct applications, each one deserves its own Neon project. A good rule of thumb: one Neon project per source code repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, Neon recommends that you avoid creating too many databases in a single Neon project. If you have multiple, distinct applications, each one deserves its own Neon project. A good rule of thumb: use one Neon project per source code repository.
```

#### Connections temporarily interrupted

Existing connections are temporarily interrupted during the restore operation. However, your connection details do not change. All connections are re-established as soon as the restore operation is finished.

#### Technical details

> At Neon we aim for transparency, so if you are interested in understanding the technical implementation behind the scenes, see the details below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At Neon we aim for transparency, so if you are interested in understanding the technical implementation of a branch restore operation, see the details below.
```

> Existing connections are temporarily interrupted during the restore operation. However, your connection details do not change. All connections are re-established as soon as the restore operation is finished.

Author: Good point. We might need to modify this elsewhere too, actually.

<details>
<summary>View technical details</summary>

Similar to the manual restore operation using the Neon Console and API described [here](/docs/guides/branching-pitr), the Restore operation performs a similar set of actions, but automatically:

1. On initiating a restore action, Neon builds a new point-in-time branch by matching your selected timestamp to the corresponding LSN of the relevant entries in the shared WAL record.
1. The compute endpoint for your initial branch is moved to this new branch, so that your connection string remains stable.
1. We rename your new branch to the exact name as your initial branch, so the effect is seamless; it looks and acts like the same branch.
1. Your initial branch, which now has no compute attached to it, is renamed to _branch_name_old_head_timestamp_ to keep the pre-restore branch available should you need to rollback. Note that initial branch was the parent for your new branch, and this is reflected when you look at your branch details.

</details>

### Time Travel Assist

> To help troubleshoot your data's history, you can Time Travel Assist to run read-only queries against any selected timestamp within your history retention window. It's a good idea to run this kind of query to make sure you've targeted the correct restore point before you restore a branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To help troubleshoot your data's history, you can use Time Travel Assist to run read-only queries against any selected timestamp within your history retention window. It's a good idea to run this kind of query to make sure you've targeted the correct restore point before you restore a branch.
```

> The restore operation and time travel assist are meant to work together. When you select a branch and timestamp, you are setting up Time Travel Assist to automatically query against that particular point in time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The restore operation and Time Travel Assist are meant to work together. When you select a branch and timestamp, you are setting up Time Travel Assist to automatically query against that particular point in time.
```

To help troubleshoot your data's history, you can use Time Travel Assist to run read-only queries against any selected timestamp within your history retention window. It's a good idea to run this kind of query to make sure you've targeted the correct restore point before you restore a branch.

The restore operation and Time Travel Assist are meant to work together. When you select a branch and timestamp, you are setting up Time Travel Assist to automatically query against that particular point in time.

![Time travel assist](/docs/guides/branch_time_travel.png)

> #### About ephemeral endpoints

Author: Done

> Time travel queries leverage Neon's instant branching capability to create a temporary branch and compute endpoint at the selected point in time, which is automatically removed once you are done your time travel querying. The endpoints are ephemeral: they are not listed on the **Branches** page or in a CLI or API list branches request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Time travel queries leverage Neon's instant branching capability to create a temporary branch and compute endpoint at the selected point in time, which is automatically removed once you are done your time travel querying. The compute endpoints are ephemeral: they are not listed on the **Branches** page or in a CLI or API list branches request.
```

Time travel queries leverage Neon's instant branching capability to create a temporary branch and compute endpoint at the selected point in time, which is automatically removed once you are done your time travel querying. The compute endpoints are ephemeral: they are not listed on the **Branches** page or in a CLI or API list branches request.

However, you can see the history of operations related to the creation and deletion of the ephemeral branch on the **Operations** page:

- start_compute
- create_branch
- delete_timeline
- suspend_compute

#### How long do ephemeral endpoints remain active

> The ephemeral endpoints are created according to your configured [default](/docs/manage/projects#reset-the-default-compute-size) size. An ephemeral endpoint remains active for as long as you keep running queries against it. After 10 seconds of inactivity, the timeline is deleted and the endpoint is removed.

Author: Will think about this one. I *think* it's mostly an internal control plane term, but "delete_timeline" shows in the operation page, we mention it here.

> ## How to use

Reviewer 2: "Usage"

Author: Changed to "How to use branch restore"

### Performing time travel queries

Here is how to use the Time Travel Assist SQL editor:

1. Select the branch you want to query against, then select a timestamp, the same as you would to [Restore a branch](#restore-a-branch-to-an-earlier-state).

    This makes the selection for the Time Travel query. Notice the updated fields above the SQL editor show the **branch** and **timestamp** you just selected.
    ![Time travel query](/docs/guides/time_travel_assist.png)
  
1. Check that you have the right database selected to run your query against. Use the database selector under the SQL editor to switch to a different database for querying against.
1. Write your read-only query in the editor, then click **Query at timestamp** to run the query. You don't have to include time paramaters in the query; the query is automatically targetted to your selected timestamp.

If your query is successful, you will see a table of results under the editor.

Depending on your query and the selected timestamp, instead of a table of results, you might see different error messages like:
| Error                | Explanation             |
|----------------------|-------------------------|

> | If you query a timestamp in the future         | Console request failed with 400 Bad Request: timestamp 2024-01-10 21:59:48.639 +0000 UTC is in the future, try an older timestamp |

Reviewer 2: Maybe replace these dates with placeholders? Something like `<timestamp>`

Author: Done. Agree, less cluttered.

| If you query a timestamp from before your project was created | Console request failed with 400 Bad Request: parent timestamp 2023-10-01 20:59:48.639 +0000 UTC is earlier than the project creation timestamp 2023-11-07 18:47:53.023515 +0000 UTC, try a more recent timestamp |
| If you query from earlier than your history retention window | Console request failed with 400 Bad Request: timestamp 2023-12-31 21:59:48.639 +0000 UTC precedes your project's history retention window of 168h0m0s, try a more recent timestamp |

Adjust your selected timestamp accordingly.

## Billing

> There are minimal impacts to billing from these two related features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are minimal impacts to billing from the branch restore and Time Travel Assist features.
```

Reviewer: Additional notes:

- Should we cover the limitations? 
-- You cannot delete a backup branch without first removing the restored child branch. 
-- Once you restore a branch, you cannot reset from "main"? 
- Storage costs: Eventually, the child restore branch and the backup parent branch will diverge, and the backup parent branch will continue to hold data from an earlier point in time. These parent back up branches will start to cost you as they age beyond the history retention window. Do we need to document that as a limitation? Could you add an endpoint to a parent branch backup branch and remove all data if you need to?

Author: These are good points. I think we probably should add a limitations section. Will get confirmation about these before adding the section.
